Doc/theme shadowing (#462)
vtex/faststore: docs/wip/theme-shadowing.md

# Shadowing

> This documentation will address Shadowing in Gatsby Themes focusing on how we use it in the Store Framework Jamstack (SFJ). You can find general explanations and examples of the Shadowing concept in the [Gatsby documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/plugins-and-themes/shadowing/).

Reviewer: This documentation explains how we use Shadowing in Gatsby Theme in the Store Framework Jamstack (SFJ). 
 
 You can find general explanations and examples of the Shadowing concept in the [Gatsby documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/plugins-and-themes/shadowing/).

## Importance of Shadowing

> In [Gatsby documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/conceptual/plugins-themes-and-starters/) we see that _"Gatsby themes allow Gatsby site functionality to be packaged as a standalone product for others (and yourself!) to easily reuse."_, it means that when you use the theme we developed, you will be able to use pre-configured functionality, data sourcing, design and everything else we add to our theme.

Reviewer: > Gatsby themes allow Gatsby site functionality to be packaged as a standalone product for others (and yourself!) to easily reuse."
 
According to [Gatsby documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/conceptual/plugins-themes-and-starters/), when using the theme we developed, you will be able to use pre-configured functionality, data sourcing, design and everything else that is part of it.

> Our theme packages already includes a site structure with a handful of pages and React components that are used to build those pages. You can use this structure to guide the development of specific pages and components of your site. In order to be able to change what we offer, you can make use of the Shadowing concept.

Reviewer: Our theme packages includes a site structure with a handful of pages and React components that are used to build those pages. 
 
 Use this structure as a guide for developing specific pages and components of your site — in order to be able to change what we offer, you can make use of the Shadowing concept.

> As stated in the [Gatsby documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/plugins-and-themes/shadowing/): _"This feature allows users to replace a file in the src directory that is included in the webpack bundle with their own implementation."_. Therefore, you have the ability to adapt any file to suit your needs, for example: styles, to match your visual identity, and even change the functionality of a component, to meet your business rules.

Reviewer: As stated in the [Gatsby documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/plugins-and-themes/shadowing/):
 > This feature allows users to replace a file in the src directory that is included in the webpack bundle with their own implementation.
 
You'll have the ability to adapt any file to suit your needs, for example: styles, to match your visual identity, and even change the functionality of a component, to meet your business rules.

## Shadowing on SFJ

> ### What can I shadow?

Reviewer: ### Using shadowing

> In the [Gatsby documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/plugins-and-themes/shadowing/#any-source-file-is-shadowable) you'll learn that you can override (_shadow_) any source file, not just React components. In our example-store implementation, we shadowed this typescript [file](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/master/packages/gatsby-plugin-i18n/src/i18n/en.ts) from `gatsby-plugin-i18n` to add our example-store expressions, transforming it into this [file](https://github.com/vtex-sites/storecomponents.store/blob/master/src/%40vtex/gatsby-plugin-i18n/i18n/en.ts). You can customize any file by creating a file in the same path as the theme you are using, example: `.../i18n/en.ts`, that way the Shadowing API will know that it should use your file, instead of the theme's file.

Reviewer: You can override (_shadow_) any source file. 

As in our example-store implementation, where we shadowed a typescript [file](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/master/packages/gatsby-plugin-i18n/src/i18n/en.ts) from `gatsby-plugin-i18n` to add our example-store expressions, transforming it into this [one](https://github.com/vtex-sites/storecomponents.store/blob/master/src/%40vtex/gatsby-plugin-i18n/i18n/en.ts).

> :warning: Please note that since the Store Framework Jamstack is built using Gatsby, you are able to use any resource/concept/feature present in Gatsby. Therefore, all types of shadowing explained in the Gatsby documentation works perfectly when you are using the SFJ.

Reviewer: ℹ️ Rember that since Store Framework Jamstack is built using Gatsby, you are able to use any resource/concept/feature present in Gatsby. Therefore, all types of shadowing explained in the Gatsby documentation works perfectly when using the SFJ.

# Shadowing

> This documentation will address Shadowing in Gatsby Themes focusing on how we use it in the Store Framework Jamstack (SFJ). You can find general explanations and examples of the Shadowing concept in the [Gatsby documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/plugins-and-themes/shadowing/).

Reviewer 2: [Shadowing](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/conceptual/how-shadowing-works/) is a Gatsby concept that allows high levels of rendering customization by letting users override components, objects, or any other element in a theme’s `src` directory.

>ℹ️ We strongly encourage you to check Gatsby's documentation and explore some [Shadowing](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/plugins-and-themes/shadowing/) examples.

> ## Importance of Shadowing
> In [Gatsby documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/conceptual/plugins-themes-and-starters/) we see that _"Gatsby themes allow Gatsby site functionality to be packaged as a standalone product for others (and yourself!) to easily reuse."_, it means that when you use the theme we developed, you will be able to use pre-configured functionality, data sourcing, design and everything else we add to our theme.
> 
> Our theme packages already includes a site structure with a handful of pages and React components that are used to build those pages. You can use this structure to guide the development of specific pages and components of your site. In order to be able to change what we offer, you can make use of the Shadowing concept.
> 
> As stated in the [Gatsby documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/plugins-and-themes/shadowing/): _"This feature allows users to replace a file in the src directory that is included in the webpack bundle with their own implementation."_. Therefore, you have the ability to adapt any file to suit your needs, for example: styles, to match your visual identity, and even change the functionality of a component, to meet your business rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## How you'll use shadowing in the SFJ

In the [Gatsby Conceptual Guides](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/conceptual/plugins-themes-and-starters/), we have the following:

*"Gatsby themes allow Gatsby site functionality to be packaged as a standalone product for others (and yourself!) to easily reuse."*

In the SFJ context, this means that when using the [VTEX Store Components theme](https://github.com/vtex-sites/storecomponents.store), you will be able to use pre-configured functionalities, data sourcing, design, and other additional settings the VTEX theme includes.

The VTEX Store Components theme packages already include a site structure, containing:

- Home, Product, and Search pre-defined pages.
- Pre-defined React components used as templates to build those pages.

To customize your STF store and style it the way you want, we'll use Shadowing in the VTEX boilerplate theme. 

>ℹ️ *When developing specific pages and components for your store, we suggest using the Store Components theme as a guide.*

As stated in the [Gatsby documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/plugins-and-themes/shadowing/): 

*"This feature allows users to replace a file in the `src` directory that is included in the webpack bundle with their own implementation."*

That means that, with shadowing, you can adapt any file to suit your needs.

For example, you can change styles to match your visual identity, or even a component functionality to meet your business rules.
```

## Shadowing on SFJ

### What can I shadow?

> In the [Gatsby documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/plugins-and-themes/shadowing/#any-source-file-is-shadowable) you'll learn that you can override (_shadow_) any source file, not just React components. In our example-store implementation, we shadowed this typescript [file](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/master/packages/gatsby-plugin-i18n/src/i18n/en.ts) from `gatsby-plugin-i18n` to add our example-store expressions, transforming it into this [file](https://github.com/vtex-sites/storecomponents.store/blob/master/src/%40vtex/gatsby-plugin-i18n/i18n/en.ts). You can customize any file by creating a file in the same path as the theme you are using, example: `.../i18n/en.ts`, that way the Shadowing API will know that it should use your file, instead of the theme's file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Gatsby allows you to shadow (a.k.a., override) not just React components but also any source file.

>ℹ️ We strongly encourage you to check Gatsby's documentation and learn more about [shadowing source files.](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/plugins-and-themes/shadowing/#any-source-file-is-shadowable)

Take the [Store Components](https://github.com/vtex-sites/storecomponents.store) theme as an example: to fulfill our specific needs regarding translations, we shadowed [this typescript file](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/master/packages/gatsby-plugin-i18n/src/i18n/en.ts) from the Gatsby internationalization plugin (`gatsby-plugin-i18n`).

As a result, we now have [this file](https://github.com/vtex-sites/storecomponents.store/blob/master/src/%40vtex/gatsby-plugin-i18n/i18n/en.ts) on our theme, including our definitions:

```ts
export default {
  ...en,

  'shelf.title.0': 'New Offers',

  'social.share': 'Share',

  'offer.product-unavailable': 'Product Unavailable',
  'offer.units-left': '{quantity} units left!',
  'offer.installments': 'Up to {numberOfInstallments}x {value} interest-free',
  'offer.discount': ' Save {price}',

  'productDetails.reference': 'Reference',
  'product-not-found': 'Product not found',
  'error-generic': 'Error',
}
```
```

*"This feature allows users to replace a file in the `src` directory that is included in the webpack bundle with their own implementation."*

That means that, with shadowing, you can adapt any file to suit your needs.

For example, you can change styles to match your visual identity, or even a component functionality to meet your business rules.

### What can I shadow?
In the [Gatsby documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/plugins-and-themes/shadowing/#any-source-file-is-shadowable) you'll learn that you can override (_shadow_) any source file, not just React components. In our example-store implementation, we shadowed this typescript [file](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/master/packages/gatsby-plugin-i18n/src/i18n/en.ts) from `gatsby-plugin-i18n` to add our example-store expressions, transforming it into this [file](https://github.com/vtex-sites/storecomponents.store/blob/master/src/%40vtex/gatsby-plugin-i18n/i18n/en.ts). You can customize any file by creating a file in the same path as the theme you are using, example: `.../i18n/en.ts`, that way the Shadowing API will know that it should use your file, instead of the theme's file.

> :warning: Please note that since the Store Framework Jamstack is built using Gatsby, you are able to use any resource/concept/feature present in Gatsby. Therefore, all types of shadowing explained in the Gatsby documentation works perfectly when you are using the SFJ.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice that you can customize any file by creating a corresponding one in the same path as the theme you are using (e.g., `.../i18n/en.ts`). This way, the Shadowing API will recognize which file it should use instead of the theme's default file.

>ℹ️ *Please note that since the SFJ is built using Gatsby, you can use any of its resources/concepts/features. Therefore, all shadowing techniques explained in the Gatsby documentation works perfectly when you are using the SFJ.*
```

> ### Examples
> The structure of the pages is in [gatsby-theme-store](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/tree/master/packages/gatsby-theme-store), the building blocks components are in [store-ui](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/tree/master/packages/store-ui/src) and you will find a piece of documentation inside a lot of components of our theme that aims to guide you through what needs to be done on that component/page. For example, [BelowTheFold.tsx](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/master/packages/gatsby-theme-store/src/components/ProductPage/BelowTheFold.tsx) warns you that everything added to this section should be lazy-fetched, while [ProductSummary/index.tsx](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/master/packages/gatsby-theme-store/src/components/ProductSummary/index.tsx) reminds you where the base building blocks are available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### SFJ pages and components

The SFJ Store Components boilerplate is set up as in the following:

- In the [`faststore/packages/gatsby-theme-store`](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/tree/master/packages/gatsby-theme-store) folder, you'll find a basic store page structure.
- In the [store-ui](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/tree/master/packages/store-ui/src) folder, you'll find the building blocks components.

Additionally, you will find a piece of information inside many of our theme components, which aims to quickly guide you on how to use that component/page.

Take the [BelowTheFold.tsx](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/master/packages/gatsby-theme-store/src/components/ProductPage/BelowTheFold.tsx) component as an example.
```

> In each of the following "how to shadow" examples, we will present a goal and show how to achieve it:
> 
> 1. We want to completely shadow the [AboveTheFold](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/master/packages/gatsby-theme-store/src/components/HomePage/AboveTheFold.tsx) component of the HomePage in our example-store.
> 
>     Firstly, we create a new file named `AboveTheFold.tsx`, just like the original file. This will result in the following directory tree:
>     ```
>     storecomponents.store
>     └── src
>         └── @vtex
>             └──gatsby-theme-store
>                 └── components
>                     └── HomePage
>                         └──AboveTheFold.tsx
>     ```
>     Then, we implement it however we want. In this example, we go from [this](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/master/packages/gatsby-theme-store/src/components/HomePage/AboveTheFold.tsx), which is just a text explaining what should be in this _"fold"_:
>     ```
>     const Fold: FC<Props> = () => (
>       <Center height="800px">
>         <Text sx={{ width: '50%' }}>
>           This is the Above the fold part of your home page. All sync items should
>           be rendered in here. Thus, make sure all data rendered in this part is
>           fetched during Server Side Rendering and revalidated on the client if
>           necessary
>         </Text>
>       </Center>
>     )
>     ```
>     to [this](https://github.com/vtex-sites/storecomponents.store/blob/master/src/%40vtex/gatsby-theme-store/components/HomePage/AboveTheFold.tsx) implementation:
>     ```
>     const Fold: FC<Props> = () => (
>       <>
>         <Carousel allItems={CAROUSEL_ITEMS} height="540px" width="360px" />
>         <RichTextRow />
>       </>
>     )
>     ```
> 
> 2. We want to customize, but also reuse the code from the original file.
> 
>     In order to do that, we would create a file like the previous example, but now we would import the theme's original file. That way, we won't have to copy & paste all the code that we will reuse, we will only be concerned with the new code that we are going to implement.
> 
>     This is shown in [this](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/plugins-and-themes/shadowing/#importing-the-shadowed-component) example from the Gatsby documentation, in which a component is imported and wrapped with another component. 
>     In addition, there is an [example](https://github.com/vtex-sites/storecomponents.store/blob/master/src/%40vtex/gatsby-theme-store/components/ProductSummary/index.tsx) in our example-store, where we import the `Props` interface from the [shadowed file](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/master/packages/gatsby-theme-store/src/components/ProductSummary/index.tsx) to use it in our brand new ProductSummary component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### How to shadow
 
In each of the following "how to shadow" sections, we will give you examples on how to:

- Completly shadow a component.
- Customize and reuse code from the original file.

##### Completely shadowing a component

We want to completely shadow the [`AboveTheFold`](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/master/packages/gatsby-theme-store/src/components/HomePage/AboveTheFold.tsx) component from our Store Components starter `HomePage`.

Firstly, we create a new file named `AboveTheFold.tsx`, just like the original file name.

This will result in the following directory tree:

    ```
    storecomponents.store
    └── src
        └── @vtex
            └──gatsby-theme-store
                └── components
                    └── HomePage
                        └──AboveTheFold.tsx
    ```

Then, we open this file to customize it however we want.

In this example, we go from [this](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/master/packages/gatsby-theme-store/src/components/HomePage/AboveTheFold.tsx), which is just a text explaining what should be in the `Fold` component:

    ```ts
        const Fold: FC<Props> = () => (
          <Center height="800px">
            <Text sx={{ width: '50%' }}>
              This is the Above the fold part of your home page. All sync items should
              be rendered in here. Thus, make sure all data rendered in this part is
              fetched during Server Side Rendering and revalidated on the client if
              necessary
            </Text>
          </Center>
        )
    ```

To [this](https://github.com/vtex-sites/storecomponents.store/blob/master/src/%40vtex/gatsby-theme-store/components/HomePage/AboveTheFold.tsx) implementation:

    ```ts
        const Fold: FC<Props> = () => (
          <>
            <Carousel allItems={CAROUSEL_ITEMS} height="540px" width="360px" />
            <RichTextRow />
          </>
        )
    ```

That's all! Gatsby will now understand it should render the `AboveTheFold.tsx` component we just created instead of the theme's default file.

##### Customizing and reuse code from the original file

To customize, but also reuse the code from the original file, we must create a file with the same name of the component we want to shadow just like in the previous example, but now we must also import the theme's original file. 

That way, we won't have to copy and paste all the code that we will reuse, we will only be concerned with the new code that we are going to implement.

This is shown in [this example](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/plugins-and-themes/shadowing/#importing-the-shadowed-component) from the Gatsby documentation, in which a component is imported and wrapped with another component.

In addition, there is an [example](https://github.com/vtex-sites/storecomponents.store/blob/master/src/%40vtex/gatsby-theme-store/components/ProductSummary/index.tsx) in our Store Components starter, where we import the `Props` interface from the [shadowed file](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/blob/master/packages/gatsby-theme-store/src/components/ProductSummary/index.tsx) to use it in our brand new `ProductSummary` component.

```

Reviewer 2: Aqui ficou com #########, mas a ideia seria separar essa doc em outras menores

## Reference Implementation

> Since Gastby is an open source framework, that are many examples out there, but you could always refer to our [example-store](https://github.com/vtex-sites/storecomponents.store).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since Gatsby is an open-source framework, there are many examples out there, but you could always refer to our [Store Component starter (`storecomponents.store`)](https://github.com/vtex-sites/storecomponents.store).
```
